<pre><code>ooooooooooooo            .o8       oooo             .oooooo..o     .                       oooo                           
8'   888   `8           "888       `888            d8P'    `Y8   .o8                       `888                           
     888       .oooo.    888oooo.   888   .ooooo.  Y88bo.      .o888oo  .oooo.    .ooooo.   888  oooo   .ooooo.  oooo d8b 
     888      `P  )88b   d88' `88b  888  d88' `88b  `"Y8888o.    888   `P  )88b  d88' `"Y8  888 .8P'   d88' `88b `888""8P 
     888       .oP"888   888   888  888  888ooo888      `"Y88b   888    .oP"888  888        888888.    888ooo888  888     
     888      d8(  888   888   888  888  888    .o oo     .d8P   888 . d8(  888  888   .o8  888 `88b.  888    .o  888     
    o888o     `Y888""8o  `Y8bod8P' o888o `Y8bod8P' 8""88888P'    "888" `Y888""8o `Y8bod8P' o888o o888o `Y8bod8P' d888b    </code></pre>

p=. Publish spreadsheets as interactive tables. And do it on deadline.

You can see an example table working "here":http://table-stacker.appspot.com/.

h2. Features

* Convert a CSV file into an interactive HTML table that sorts, filters and paginates.
* Quickly publish interactives tables to Google App Engine and serve them on the web for free.
* Instantly syndicate data as CSV, XLS and JSON.
* Post an RSS feed and sitemap that promote the latest data.
* Link similar datasets together with blog-style tagging.

h2. Requirements

* "git":http://git-scm.com/
* "python2.5":http://www.python.org/download/releases/2.5.5/
* "virtualenv":http://pypi.python.org/pypi/virtualenv

h2. Getting Started

h3. *01. Register a new application with Google App Engine.*

Go to "https://appengine.google.com/":https://appengine.google.com/. Don't download the SDK. Don't read the docs. Just create an account and mint a new application with a name like _my-table-stacker_. It serves as the unique identifer for your app inside the Google system, and the namespace where it will first appear online (i.e. "http://my-table-stacker.appspot.com/":http://my-table-stacker.appspot.com/).

h3. *02. Install the code on your computer*

It's not required, but I recommend creating a virtual environment to store your application. I like to do this with the Python module "virtualenv":http://pypi.python.org/pypi/virtualenv, which creates a walled-off garden for the Python code to work without distraction from the outside world. If you don't have it, you'll need to install it now, which just might be as easy as:

<pre><code>$ pip install virtualenv
# Or maybe ...
$ sudo easy_install install virtualenv
# Or, if you're in Ubuntu ...
# sudo apt-get install python-virtualenv</code></pre>

Once you have virtualenv installed, make it happen by navigating to wherever you keep your code and firing off the following. I'm going to call this project _my-table-stacker_, but you should substitute whatever you're calling your version.
<pre><code>$ virtualenv --no-site-packages my-table-stacker</code></pre>

Now jump into the directory it creates.
<pre><code>$ cd table-stacker</code></pre>

Activate the private environment with virtualenv's custom command.
<pre><code>$ . bin/activate</code></pre>

Download the latest version of the code repository into a directory called _project_.
<pre><code>$ git clone git://github.com/datadesk/latimes-table-stacker.git project</code></pre>

And jump in and get ready to work.
<pre><code>$ cd project</code></pre>

h3. *03. Set your application id*

In the _project_ folder you will find a file called _app.yaml_. It contains the basic configuration for your Google App Engine site. You only need to make one little change: Replace _my-table-stacker_ with the application id you registered in step one.
<pre><code>application: my-table-stacker</code></pre>

h3. *04. Launch a test version of the site*

You'll want to run this step in a new terminal shell. So open up a new window or tab, navigate to the _project_ directory and fire off the following. It is a "Django management command":http://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/ref/django-admin/#runserver-port-or-address-port that will start a test version of the site on your machine.

Note that you'll see me using _python2.5_ throughout, instead of the usual _python_ command. This is because I work in Ubuntu and I've found that Google App Engine "is not compatible with newer versions of Python":http://www.codigomanso.com/en/2010/05/google-app-engine-en-ubuntu-10-4-lucid-lynx/. I suspect is is the case with other operating systems, but I'm not sure. So, I'd recommend using _python2.5_ but, as always, your mileage may vary.

<pre><code>$ python2.5 manage.py runserver</code></pre>

h3. *05. Load the example table*

You'll be asked to log in with your Google App Engine credentials, don't worry. That's what's supposed to happen.
<pre><code>python manage.py loadtable major-us-coal-mines-2009 --host=localhost:8000</code></pre>
If you want to peek under the hood and see how it works, check out the YAML file in the yaml directory.

h3. *06. Check it out in your browser*

You should see our demo table, ready to serve at http://localhost:8000/

h3. *07. Upload your app to appspot.com*

<pre><code>$ python2.5 manage.py update</code></pre>

h3. *08. Load the demo recipe to your live site*

Notice how you leave out the host option this time. These commands hit your live site by default.
<pre><code>python2.5 manage.py loadtable major-us-coal-mines-2009</code></pre>

h3. *09. Check out your site!*

You should find it at http://your-app-id-here.appspot.com You might draw Django errors for a few minutes as the app builds its indexes, but don't worry. It'll be ready after you have a cup of coffee.

h3. *10. Try configuring and loading your own table*

YAML files go in the yaml folder. Corresponding CSV files in the csv folder.

h2. Credits

This project would not be possible without the generous work of:

* "ProPublica's News Application Desk":http://www.propublica.org/nerds, and particularly "Jeff Larson":https://github.com/thejefflarson, who developed the Ruby libraries "table-fu":https://github.com/propublica/table-fu and "table-setter":https://github.com/propublica/table-setter.
* "Chris Amico":https://github.com/eyeseast, who did the noble work of "porting table-fu to Python":https://github.com/eyeseast/python-tablefu.
* Christian Bach, the man who gave us "tablesorter":http://tablesorter.com/docs/.
* The army of people who make something like "google-app-engine-django":http://code.google.com/p/google-app-engine-django/ possible.








